For this project, I used the pandas data analysis library. I started out reading in a csv file with yearly deaths by clinic into a DataFrame. The dataset included data for two different clinics. I calculated the total proportion of deaths per births and then examined the proportion of deaths per births for each clinic separately. Plotting the proportion of deaths at clinic one compared to clinic two, it looks like the proportion of deaths was higher at clinic one. 
  
Dr. Semmelweis observed this pattern of a higher proportion of deaths occurring at the first clinic. Clinic one had mostly medical students, and clinic two had mostly midwife students. One of the main differences between the medical students and the midwife students was that the midwife students only worked with women giving birth while the medical students also did autopsies on corpses. Semmelweis suspected that something was spreading from the dead bodies to the women giving birth. To lower the mortality rates, he decreed: Wash your hands! 

I loaded monthly birth and death data from clinic one into a pandas DataFrame. In 1847, Semmelweis made handwashing mandatory. I plotted the monthly proportion of deaths per births and then highlighted the period after medical students began washing their hands. The graph indeed looks like the handwashing reduced the number of deaths. 

Calculating the mean difference suggest that the proportion of deaths was reduced by about 8% after medical students started washing their hands. The ratio of deaths at clinic one fell from 10% on average to 2%. I calculated a confidence interval using the bootstrap method to get an idea of the uncertainty around how much hand washing reduced mortality. Hand washing reduced the proportion of deaths by between 6.7 and 10 percentage points, according to a 95% confidence interval. 

Statistics and statistical arguments were not standard in the 1800s medical field. Semmelweis published long tables of raw data about the differences in childbed fever at the two clinics and the results of handwashing. Despite the evidence, contemporary scientists ridiculed Semmelweis’ theory that a substance from the autopsy room caused childbed fever. Today it is understood that bacteria on the medical students’ hands caused infection. In 1849, Semmelweis was forced to leave the Vienna General Hospital. Perhaps if Semmelweis had been able to show graphs or confidence intervals to his contemporaries, his theory would have gained full acceptance.  
